
Malaria is a serious tropical disease spread by mosquitoes. If it isn't diagnosed and treated quickly, it can be fatal.

A single mosquito bite is all it takes for someone to become infected.

Symptoms of malaria
It's important to be aware of the symptoms of malaria if you're travelling to areas where there's a high risk of the disease. This means that you can get medical attention quickly.

Symptoms are similar to those of flu and usually appear 6 to 30 days after the mosquito bite, but it can sometimes take up to a year for symptoms to start.

The initial symptoms of malaria include:

a high temperature (fever)
headache
sweats
chills
muscle aches or pains
vomiting and or diarrhoea
These symptoms can start mild and may be difficult to identify as malaria.

When to seek medical attention
Malaria is a serious illness that can get worse very quickly. It can be fatal if not treated quickly.

The effects of malaria are usually more severe in:

babies
young children
pregnant women
older people

call emergency if you or your child develop symptoms of malaria during or after a visit to an area where the disease is found, even if it has been several weeks, months or a year after you return from travelling.
You must tell the healthcare professional that you have been in a country with a risk of malaria, including any brief stopovers.

What causes malaria?
Malaria is caused by the Plasmodium parasite. The parasite is spread to humans through the bites of infected mosquitoes.

There are 5 different types of Plasmodium parasite that cause malaria in humans. They are found in different parts of the world (but do overlap in certain areas) and vary in terms of how severe the infection can be.

All malaria infections cause the same symptoms and require immediate medical attention. It's not possible to find out which type of malaria you have from symptoms alone.

Types of malaria parasite
How malaria is spread
The Plasmodium parasite is spread by mosquitoes. These are known as 'night-biting' mosquitoes because they most commonly bite between sunset and sunrise.

When a mosquito bites a person already infected with malaria, it becomes infected and spreads the parasite to the next person it bites. Malaria can't be spread directly from person to person.

When an infected mosquito bites, the parasite enters the blood and travels to the liver. In the liver, it develops for days to weeks before re-entering the blood. This is the point where symptoms develop and urgent treatment is required.

Although it is very rare, malaria can also be spread from a person with the infection through blood transfusions and sharing needles.

Where is malaria found?
Malaria is found in tropical and subtropical regions of the world. It is not found in the UK or Europe.



Complications of malaria
Malaria is a serious illness that can be fatal if not diagnosed and treated quickly. Severe complications of malaria can occur within hours or days of the first symptoms. This means it is important to seek urgent medical help as soon as possible.

Anaemia
The destruction of red blood cells by the malaria parasite can cause severe anaemia.

Anaemia is a condition where the red blood cells are unable to carry enough oxygen to the body's muscles and organs. This can leave you feeling drowsy, weak and faint.

Cerebral malaria
In rare cases, malaria can affect the brain. This is known as cerebral malaria which can cause your brain to swell, sometimes leading to permanent brain damage. It can also cause fits (seizures) or coma.

Other complications
Other complications that can arise as a result of severe malaria include:

liver failure and jaundice – yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes
shock – a sudden drop in blood pressure
pulmonary oedema – a build-up of fluid in the lungs
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
abnormally low blood sugar – hypoglycaemia
kidney failure
swelling and rupturing of the spleen
dehydration
Malaria in pregnancy
If you get malaria while pregnant, you and your baby have an increased risk of developing serious complications like:

premature birth – birth before 37 weeks of pregnancy
low birth weight
restricted growth of the baby in the womb
stillbirth
miscarriage
death of the mother
Pregnant women are advised to avoid travelling to regions with a risk of malaria.

The preferred antimalarial for interim oral treatment is artemether-lumefantrine (Coartem®) because of its fast onset of action. Other oral options include atovaquone-proguanil (Malarone™), quinine, and mefloquine. IV or oral clindamycin and tetracyclines, such as doxycycline, are not adequate for interim treatment. 



DENGUE

Key Facts


1 in 4: About one in four people infected with dengue will get sick.
For people who get sick with dengue, symptoms can be mild or severe.
Severe dengue can be life-threatening within a few hours and often requires care at a hospital.
Symptoms
Mild symptoms of dengue can be confused with other illnesses that cause fever, aches and pains, or a rash.
Graphic of human body showing most common symptom of dengue is fever with any of the following: eye pain, headache, muscle pain, rash, bone pain, nausea/vomiting, joint pain

The most common symptom of dengue is fever with any of the following:
Nausea, vomiting
Rash
Aches and pains (eye pain, typically behind the eyes, muscle, joint, or bone pain)
Symptoms of dengue typically last 2–7 days. Most people will recover after about a week.

Treatment
There is no specific medicine to treat dengue.
Treat the symptoms of dengue and see your healthcare provider.
If you think you have dengue [PDF – 1 page]
See a healthcare provider if you develop a fever or have symptoms of dengue. Tell him or her about your travel.
Rest as much as possible.
Take acetaminophen (also known as paracetamol outside of the United States) to control fever and relieve pain.
Do not take aspirin or ibuprofen!
Drink plenty of fluids to stay hydrated. Drink water or drinks with added electrolytes.
For mild symptoms, care for a sick infant, child, or family member at home.
Sign for emergency room
Symptoms of dengue can become severe within a few hours. Severe dengue is a medical emergency.

Severe dengue
About 1 in 20 people who get sick with dengue will develop severe dengue.
Severe dengue can result in shock, internal bleeding, and even death.
If you have had dengue in the past, you are more likely to develop severe dengue.
Infants and pregnant women are at higher risk for developing severe dengue.
Symptoms of severe dengue
Warning signs of severe dengue

Watch for signs and symptoms of severe dengue. Warning signs usually begin in the 24–48 hours after your fever has gone away.



Immediately go to a local clinic or emergency room if you or a family member has any of the following symptoms.
Belly pain, tenderness
Vomiting (at least 3 times in 24 hours)
Bleeding from the nose or gums
Vomiting blood, or blood in the stool
Feeling tired, restless, or irritable
Treatment of severe dengue
If you have any warning signs, see a healthcare provider or go to the emergency room immediately.

Severe dengue is a medical emergency. It requires immediate medical care at a clinic or hospital.
If you are traveling, find health care abroad.



CHIKUNGUNYA


Transmission
Chikungunya virus is transmitted by mosquitoes, most commonly Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti and Aedes (Stegomyia) albopictus, which can also transmit dengue and Zika viruses. These mosquitoes bite primarily during daylight hours. They lay eggs in containers with standing water. Both species feed outdoors, and Ae. aegypti also feeds indoors.
When an uninfected mosquito feeds on a person who has CHIKV circulating in their blood, the mosquito can ingest the virus. The virus then replicates in the mosquito over several days, gets to its salivary glands, and can be transmitted into a new human host when the mosquito bites them. The virus again begins to replicate in this newly infected person and reaches high concentrations in their blood, at which point they can further infect other mosquitoes and perpetuate the transmission cycle.

Symptoms
In symptomatic patients, CHIKV disease onset is typically 4–8 days (range 2–12 days) after the bite of an infected mosquito. It is characterized by an abrupt onset of fever, frequently accompanied by severe joint pain. The joint pain is often debilitating and usually lasts for a few days but may be prolonged, lasting for weeks, months or even years. Other common signs and symptoms include joint swelling, muscle pain, headache, nausea, fatigue and rash. Since these symptoms overlap with other infections, including those with dengue and Zika viruses, cases can be misdiagnosed. In the absence of significant joint pain, symptoms in infected individuals are usually mild and the infection may go unrecognized.
Most patients recover fully from the infection; however, occasional cases of eye, heart, and neurological complications have been reported with CHIKV infections. Patients at extremes of the age spectrum are at higher risk for severe disease. Newborns infected during delivery and older people with underlying medical conditions may become severely ill and CHIKV infection can increase the risk of death.
Once an individual is recovered, available evidence suggests they are likely to be immune from future infections.

Diagnostics
Chikungunya virus may be detected directly in blood samples collected during the first week of illness using tests such as reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction (RT–PCR).
Other tests can detect a person’s immune response to chikungunya virus infection. These are typically used after the first week of infection to test for antibodies to the virus. The antibody levels are typically detectable by the first week after illness onset and can still be detected for about 2 months.  

Treatment and vaccines
The clinical management includes addressing fever and joint pain with anti-pyretics and optimal analgesics, drinking plenty of fluids and general rest. There is no specific antiviral drug treatment for CHIKV infections.
Paracetamol or acetaminophen are recommended for pain relief and reducing fever until dengue infections are ruled out, as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can increase the risk of bleeding.
While there are several vaccines currently in different stages of development (as of Dec 2022) they are yet to be licensed. There is no commercial vaccine available to protect against chikungunya virus infection.


